The singularly most
readily observed
astrological phenomenon
is that of day and night.
The rotation of the
Earth creates a period
of approximately 12 hours
of day and 12 hours of night
if you're on the equator.
And of course, the closer
you get to the north
or south poles, the more this
horizon of light and darkness
becomes bent out of shape
by the tilt of the earth
based upon the time of the year.
This daily cycle of light and
dark, which is a diurnal cycle,
there's two parts
of it each day,
is a basic tenet of astrological
analysis and understanding.
And it is so important that the
rising sign, which we talked
about in an earlier
session, is actually
the marker of the horizon that
separates light from dark.
The sign that's rising
and the particular point
on that rising
sign, the ascendant,
is one point on one side.
If you think of the sun rising
at the moment of sunrise,
the sun is on the ascendant.
Then depending upon
what time of year
it is, whether it's 12 hours
later or just a few hours later
if you're in the Arctic in
winter or many hours later
if it's mid summer, when the
sun is on the Western horizon,
that marks the descendant.
The line connecting the
ascendant and descendant
create the horizon.
Astrologically, when we look
at a birth chart or horoscope,
one of the first
judgments that we make
is how many planets
are above the horizon,
and how many planets
are below the horizon?
Because above the horizon,
we have visibility,
and in fact, the point that's
highest above the horizon
is the midheaven.
The midheaven is the point
that the sun would be at noon
if the sun was really there.
There is always a midheaven.
Then again, if we're
far north in the winter,
the midheaven can be pretty
close to the horizon.
And so the midheaven isn't
always directly up above.
But the fact is that when
planets are above the horizon,
they are observable.
They are seen.
They have to do with what
other people can see about us.
If someone is born
with all their planets
above the horizon,
it's like they
live their life in a fishbowl.
Everyone sees who they are.
If someone's born with many
planets or several planets
below the horizon,
they've got secrets
that we don't know about.
There's parts of their life
that are more complicated
and that are more hidden.
The midheaven in particular,
like the rising sign
or the ascendant,
holds particular weight
in the interpretation
of someone's chart
or in the understanding
of any given
moment throughout the day.
The midheaven, it's almost
like the rising sign
is how we appear to
others and it's personal.
The midheaven, the
point up above,
it's like it's the career point.
It's if you took
everything out of someone's
life that was personal and
said, now describe them.
You would have to say, oh,
that's the person who's
on the Board of Education.
Oh, that's the guy that got
committed for such and such
so many years ago.
Oh, that's that
Nobel Prize winner.
Oh, that's that woman who
is awesome because she
climbed this mountain.
Whatever it is.
You see, but it's not
about anything personal.
The midheaven is how we
stand up in the outer world.
The midheaven, it's
the social point--
and I don't mean
social like party--
it's like the social reality.
And as such, that someone who is
born with many planets that are
close to the midheaven,
those planets
determine or at
least influence how
that person's career unfolds.
And in fact, knowing what
sign you have on the midheaven
helps you understand
how you might best
utilize your own
energies in your career.
For example, if someone had a
fire sign on their midheaven,
this might be someone
who had to be active
in their line of work, whereas
someone who had a water
sign on their midheaven might be
more indicative of someone who
was more contemplative
or emotional,
let's say in counseling or
in something of that sort.
Whereas someone who had an
air sign on their midheaven
might be someone who had to
make more use of their intellect
at work.
And someone who had an earth
sign on their midheaven
might be someone even in
construction, for example,
but someone who had more
sense of a grounded approach.
Now our midheavens are
tempered not only by the sign
but what planets may be near
to that sign or in that sign.
And then we can get an
understanding of the nature
of not who we are
individually but
our place in the outer world.